---
title: Ages 7-9
layout: default
parent: Age-based guide
nav_order: 3
---


# Ages 7–9: "Not Everything Online Is True"

Kids this age start gaming, messaging, searching, and watching videos independently.


## Focus
This is the right age to discuss:
- Manipulation
- Tricks
- Oversharing
- Digital permanence


## Lesson 1: Manipulation

When someone is trying to manipulate, they might use one of these tactics or phrases:

- Kid-friendly language. They talk the way kids talk.

- Flattery. Sometimes people say extra nice things to gain trust quickly.
    - "You’re so mature."
    - "You’re my favorite."

- Urgency. Scammers want people to act before thinking.
    - "Hurry!"
    - "You only have one chance!"

- Secrecy
    - "Keep this between us."
    - Safe relationships do not depend on hiding things from trusted adults.

- Examples:
    - "Click here to win!"
    - "Don’t tell your parents."
    - "You have to do this now."

## Lesson 2: Tricks
Introduce "Tricky Behavior".

- Some people online try to get:
    - Attention
    - Information
    - Money
    - Pictures
    - Access to accounts



- Teach kids:
    - "Safe adults don’t pressure kids into secrets."


## Lesson 3: Oversharing
Teach basic password safety.

Teach:
- Long passwords are stronger
- Don’t reuse passwords
- Don’t share passwords or device codes with friends

Someone might try to learn things about you to figure out what your passwords are.


Good rule:
"Passwords are like toothbrushes: personal and not for sharing."


## Lesson 4: Digital permanence
Explain "Digital Footprints". Teach them what their digital footprint is and how it can be used against them.

Anything shared online may:
- Be copied
- Be screenshot
- Spread to other people


Good phrasing:
"The internet remembers more than people expect."


## Build community in real life


- Where are kids finding togetherness and community? If it's only online, that could be a problem.
- What are the adults around kids teaching them is appropriate?
- Help define what a healthy or successful friendship looks like. 
- Teach what "care" looks like before predators do.


## Home Alone references

- Marv tried to trick Kevin into thinking they were Santa Claus and an elf.
- Harry said, "Be a good little fellow and open the door."


## Resources to share with your kids

- [Lego Build and Talk](https://www.lego.com/en-gb/families/staying-safe-online)
- [SMART Rules](https://www.childnet.com/young-people/4-11-year-olds/get-smart/)
- [SMART Rules Quiz](https://www.childnet.com/young-people/4-11-year-olds/smart-rules-quiz/)